ADR 0015 Two phase architecture (#53)
redhat-appstudio/book: ADR/0015-integration-service-two-phase-architecture.md

condition between different Snapshots that are created for each of those builds.
This would primarily manifest itself by two Snapshots getting promoted in quick
succession but neither of them having the latest images contained within them.

## Decision

In order to protect against the race conditions, the integration service will leverage a
two phase approach to testing. The phases will consist of a Component phase that will
always be executed and the optional Composite phase which would come into play only when
race conditions between component builds are detected.

### Component phase

When a single component image is built, the Integration Service tests the application
by creating a Snapshot. All Components with their images from the Global Candidate List
are included within the Snapshot and then the Component that was newly built is
updated/overwritten to complete the Snapshot creation.

After all test pipelines for the Snapshot finish successfully, the Integration service
updates the Global Candidate List with the newly built Component image and promotes
the Snapshot. This is done only if the Global Candidate List hasn't changed in

> the meantime.

Reviewer: Maybe we can say that it is only promoted if the rest of the Global Candidate List matches the rest of the tested Snapshot components?

Snapshot in the Component phase.

The Composite phase exists to resolve a race condition when teams merge multiple PRs
to multiple components of the same application at nearly the same time.
When multiple components are built at the same time, the Integration Service tests
the application by creating a composite Snapshot using multiple Components updated
to use the newly built images.

If all testing pipelines pass successfully, the Composite Snapshot is promoted
according to user preferences.

![](../diagrams/ADR-0015/composite-phase.jpg)

## Consequences

To illustrate the consequences of implementing the above approach,
we can outline two scenarios, one with a happy path where only a single component
is built at a time, and one with a race condition where two components are built
in quick succession.

### Happy path with a single component build

In the happy path without race conditions, one PR merges to one component.
1. The Component phase runs, and records results on the **Component** Snapshot.
2. The Integration Service detects that the Snapshot is up-to-date by checking the
Global Candidate List and skips the second phase of testing, marking the Snapshot as
complete.

> 3. The Global Candidate List is updated.

Reviewer: According to above, the list is updated before marking as complete.

Author: Good catch, switched the order

> Global Candidate List is updated.

Reviewer 2: Does this need rephrasing as a result of our discussions earlier in the ADR here?

Reviewer 2: No, it's probably fine as is. The next "Path with a race condition" section reads correctly.

Reviewer: I think that this can be updated because the Global Candidate List is updated and then the Snapshot is promoted.

Author: Ack, updated this to split the points

multiple component builds can happen in quick succession, leading to a potential race
condition between different Snapshots that are created for each of those builds.
This would primarily manifest itself by two Snapshots getting promoted in quick
succession but neither of them having the latest images contained within them.

## Decision

In order to protect against the race conditions, the integration service will leverage a
two phase approach to testing. The phases will consist of a Component phase that will
always be executed and the optional Composite phase which would come into play only when
race conditions between component builds are detected.

### Component phase

When a single component image is built, the Integration Service tests the application
by creating a Snapshot. All Components with their images from the Global Candidate List
are included within the Snapshot and then the Component that was newly built is
updated/overwritten to complete the Snapshot creation.

After all test pipelines for the Snapshot finish successfully, the Integration service
updates the Global Candidate List with the newly built Component image and promotes

> the Snapshot. This is done only if the rest of the Global Candidate List matches

Reviewer 2: > This is done only if the rest of the Global Candidate List matches the rest of the tested Snapshot components.

I think this differs from how I thought it was supposed to work. I thought that at the end of the Component phase (assuming that it passes), the newly built image is _always_ promoted to the Global Candidate List (unless we're operating on a PR). That way, the Composite phase always starts operating on an ApplicationSnapshot that is always just "built from" the current state of the Global Candidate List - whatever that is.

One undesirable side-effect of the design as I understood it, was that "the build could get broken". Meaning, two components A and B could both pass the first Component testing phase, and both get added to the Global Candidates List. Component A could then pass the Composite testing phase, but Component B could _fail_ the Composite testing phase if it somehow interacts badly with Component A.

At this point, the Snapshot that includes the newly built Component A but _not_ the newly built Component B would be promoted to the lowest static Environment, but the Snapshot that includes both the newly built Component A and the newly built Component B would _not_ be promoted. After this point, all new builds would fail until the user removes the broken Component B from the global candidate list (we have no documented way how to do this) or until the user merges a fix for Component B.

Reviewer 3: > One undesirable side-effect of the design as I understood it, was that "the build could get broken". 

In our early architecting days I thought it was OK for "dev" or lowest possible static environment to be broken. I actually forgot the analogue that was shared with us but it suggested hat dev AWLAYS got deployed to whether things were broken or not? If it was broken, developers submitted new commits that would fix the issue and continue rolling things forward.

Author: Ok, so the key takeaway here is that the Global Candidate List should always be updated with the newly built component when the Composite phase passes successfully?

Author: Apologies, corrected my statement, what I meant to say is: 
```
The Global Candidate List should always be updated with the newly built component when the _Component_ phase passes successfully
```

Reviewer: ACK. I will retract my previous comment in light of that.

If the Global Candidate List is always updated on a completed (success/fail) Component snapshot, then this will not necessarily result in broken dev environments as the snapshot itself might indicate failure (and therefore block promotion). In this case, we would just be blocking promotion to the lowest environment until we have a passing Snapshot. I don't have an issue with that interface as long as we are suitably notifying users of the failure (I assume it would be a PaC notification back to GH on the commit).

Author: Ok, in that case we can remove this sentence so the design matches the expectations:

> This is done only if the rest of the Global Candidate List matches the rest of the tested Snapshot components.

We will make the update to our controller logic as part of [HACBS-1779](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/HACBS-1779) so the successful Component pipeline always updates the Global Candidate list.
@ralphbean @arewm @Dannyb48

Author: I updated the wording and made the matching changes to the diagrams, please take a look

doesn't match the rest of the Component Snapshot contents, its status is marked as
invalid and the testing goes into the Composite phase.
Otherwise, the Component Snapshot is promoted according to user preferences.

![](../diagrams/ADR-0015/component-phase.jpg)

### Composite phase

The Composite phase is used when the Global Candidate List changes while testing a
Snapshot in the Component phase. The Integration service checks this before promoting

> a Snapshot at the end of the Component phase.

Reviewer: I don't think this last sentence is needed. Otherwise, I think it reads well!

Author: Yep, I can see it now too, removed it.

The Composite phase exists to resolve a race condition when teams merge multiple PRs
to multiple components of the same application at nearly the same time.
When multiple components are built at the same time, the Integration Service tests
the application by creating a composite Snapshot using multiple Components updated
to use the newly built images.

After the composite Snapshot passes testing, the entire Global Candidate List is updated

> according to its contents.

Reviewer: I think that we have to contend with another race condition here. I opened https://issues.redhat.com/browse/HACBS-1779 to discuss it.

Author: @ralphbean based on your comments, should we drop this sentence entirely and modify the Integration service so it doesn't update the Global Candidate List at the end of the Composite phase?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think so.

Reviewer 2: It is replaced with the sentence above during the _component_ phase:

> After all test pipelines for the Snapshot finish successfully, the Integration service updates the Global Candidate List with the newly built Component image

Author: Ack, removed the sentence and only mentioned promoting the Composite snapshot according to user preferences

1. The Component phase runs, and records results on the Snapshot.
2. The Integration Service detects that the Snapshot is up-to-date by checking the
Global Candidate List and skips the second phase of testing, marking the Snapshot as
complete.
3. The Snapshot is promoted according to the user preferences and the
Global Candidate List is updated.

### Path with a race condition

In the path with race conditions, two PRs merge to two components at the same time.

1. Two instances of the Component phase start up in parallel, testing two different
Snapshots - each one including one of the two merged PRs.
2. The first Snapshot finishes testing and detects that the Global Candidate List
has not changed in the meantime and finalizes the Snapshot in question,
updating the Global Candidate List with the newly built component image.
3. The second Snapshot finishes testing. It is presented with an updated
Global Candidate List that includes both changes, which have not been tested together yet.
4. A Composite Snapshot is created that includes both changes and the Integration service
starts testing it in the Composite phase.

> 5. Composite phase testing runs in full and the Snapshot is promoted according to the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
5. Composite phase testing runs in full and the **Composite** Snapshot is promoted according to the
```

Author: Ack, updated

1. Two instances of the Component phase start up in parallel, testing two different
Snapshots - each one including one of the two merged PRs.
2. The first Snapshot finishes testing and detects that the Global Candidate List
has not changed in the meantime and finalizes the Snapshot in question,
updating the Global Candidate List with the newly built component image.
3. The second Snapshot finishes testing. It is presented with an updated
Global Candidate List that includes both changes, which have not been tested together yet.
4. A Composite Snapshot is created that includes both changes and the Integration service
starts testing it in the Composite phase.
5. Composite phase testing runs in full and the Snapshot is promoted according to the
user preferences

## Footnotes
For future consideration, if two components rely on each other to the point that
breaking changes from one component create issues in another component during testing,
a new feature to support batching of components together is being investigated.
This would allow for the Integration service to hold off on testing a Component build
until the dependent build is also completed.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

We originally made this decision verbally and with diagrams back in May of 2022, and have been operating with it as the operating design since then. However, we realized (through conversations like [this slack conversation](https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/C02CTEB3MMF/p1669961732100869)) that it is not obvious without documentation. We are documenting it here as an ADR for posterity, visibility. 
```

Author: Ack, added the proposed text below this line.

# 15. The Two-phase Architecture of the Integration Service

Date Documented: 2023-02-09

## Status

In review

## Context

The Integration Service is in charge of running integration test pipelines by executing
the Tekton pipeline for each user-defined IntegrationTestScenario.

> The main payload that’s being tested are Snapshots which contain references to all

Author: Ack, updated with the suggestion.

Components that belong to the Application, along with their images.

> A problem we face: Since testing an application with Tekton pipelines takes time,
> and multiple component builds can happen in quick succession, there is potential
> for race conditions between different Snapshots that are created for each of those builds.
> This would primarily manifest itself by two Snapshots getting promoted in quick
> succession, but neither of them having the latest images contained within them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One problem faced by the integration service is caused by the fact that testing an
application with Tekton pipelines takes time. During the course of testing an application, 
multiple component builds can happen in quick succession, leading to a potential race
condition between different Snapshots that are created for each of those builds.
This would primarily manifest itself by two Snapshots getting promoted in quick
succession but neither of them having the latest images contained within them.
```

Author: Ack, updated with the suggestion.

## Decision

> In order to tackle the race conditions, a two phase approach to integration testing
> will take place. The phases will consist of a Component phase that will always be executed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to protect against the race conditions, the integration service will leverage a two phase
approach to testing. The phases will consist of a Component phase that will always be executed
```

Author: Ack, updated with the suggestion.

and the optional Composite phase which would come into play only when race conditions
between component builds are detected.

### Component phase

When a single component image is built, the Integration Service tests the application
by creating a Snapshot. All components from the Global Candidate List are included
and the Component that was built is updated/overwritten with the newly built image.

![](../diagrams/ADR-0015/component-phase.jpg)

### Composite phase

When multiple components are built at the same time, the Integration Service tests
the application by creating a composite Snapshot using multiple components updated

> to use the newly built images.

Reviewer: Can you provide details for how this composite Snapshot is created/updated as more components are built?  Here are some questions/self-answers which I think would be good to address/correct.

It doesn't have to be too detailed, but maybe some form of text description about how the Global Candidate List is created/maintained/checked.

Based on later wording, I assume that the global composite list is updated after the first phase by updating a single component. If the Global Candidate List is identical to the just-passed snapshot, then we are all good. If not, the second loop is run. Is this Global Candidate List what is used for sending snapshot references to other services or would a new Snapshot (the composite snapshot?) be created based off of the (then) Global Candidate List (Is it any different from the other Snapshot other than it is built off of the Global Candidate List)? 

It looks like Snapshots will also only be completely tested/promoted if it matches the Global Candidate List, correct?

Author: I updated the first phase to clarify that the Global Candidate List is updated only after the testing successfully finishes and the Global Candidate List hasn't changed in the meantime. I also added
```
The Composite phase is used when the Global Candidate List changes while testing a
Snapshot in the Component phase. The Integration service checks this before promoting
a Snapshot at the end of the Component phase.
```

to the description of the Composite phase. Let me know if that clears it up.

Reviewer: I think that does clear many things up. So in these situations, the Snapshot which was out of sync with the Global Candidate List will just be "discarded" in favor of the new composite snapshot created from the Global Candidate List? 

I know that this isn't the realm of the integration service, but how would this be detected/displayed in the UI, or is there no promotion representation in the UI yet?

Author: Yes, that's correct, we mark the discarded Snapshot's status as invalid with the reason that it was superseded by a composite snapshot - this could be picked up by the UI in the future.

Reviewer: Cool. I am good to resolve this thread after we indicate that a new composite snapshot is created based off of the global candidate list and that the previously tested snapshot is discarded by being marked with an invalid status.
